# Kenning fun-fact corpus -- one true fact per line, spoken VERBATIM when
# you say "Kenning, tell my team a fun fact". Lines starting with # are
# ignored. Kenning picks one at random and avoids repeating the last few.
# Add or edit freely; the file is re-read on every request.
A day on Venus is longer than a year on Venus.
Honey found in ancient Egyptian tombs was still edible after three thousand years.
Octopuses have three hearts and blue blood.
A group of flamingos is called a flamboyance.
The Eiffel Tower can grow more than six inches taller in summer as its iron expands.
Bananas are berries, but strawberries are not.
A bolt of lightning is roughly five times hotter than the surface of the Sun.
Sharks existed before trees did.
The shortest war in history lasted about thirty-eight minutes.
A teaspoon of neutron star material would weigh about six billion tons.
Wombats produce cube-shaped droppings.
The human nose can distinguish more than a trillion different scents.
Antarctica is the largest desert on Earth.
Cleopatra lived closer in time to the Moon landing than to the building of the Great Pyramid.
There are more possible games of chess than atoms in the observable universe.
A hummingbird's heart can beat over a thousand times per minute.
The Great Wall of China is not visible from space with the naked eye.
Polar bears have black skin under their white fur.
Hot water can freeze faster than cold water under some conditions, an effect called the Mpemba effect.
The longest recorded flight of a chicken is thirteen seconds.
Saturn would float in water because it is less dense than water.
A single strand of spider silk is thinner than a human hair but stronger than steel of the same width.
Sloths can hold their breath longer than dolphins can.
The dot over a lowercase i or j is called a tittle.
An octopus can squeeze through any gap larger than its beak.
The Hawaiian alphabet has only thirteen letters.
A cloud can weigh more than a million pounds.
Cows have best friends and get stressed when they are separated.
The unicorn is the national animal of Scotland.
Venus is the only planet that spins clockwise.
The inventor of the Frisbee was turned into a Frisbee after he died.
Butterflies taste with their feet.
The world's largest snowflake on record was fifteen inches wide.
A jiffy is an actual unit of time, equal to one hundredth of a second.
Some turtles can breathe through their rear ends.
The Statue of Liberty's full name is Liberty Enlightening the World.
A snail can sleep for up to three years.
The blob of toothpaste on a toothbrush is called a nurdle.
There are more stars in the universe than grains of sand on all of Earth's beaches.
Goats have rectangular pupils.
The fingerprints of a koala are almost indistinguishable from those of a human.
Bubble wrap was originally invented as wallpaper.
A group of crows is called a murder.
The Moon has moonquakes.
Hot dogs and hamburgers are named after places, not their ingredients.
Most of the dust in your home is made of dead skin cells and fibers.
The heart of a blue whale is so large a human could swim through its arteries.
A flea can jump up to two hundred times its own body length.
The first oranges were not orange but green.
Scotland has 421 words for snow.
An ostrich's eye is bigger than its brain.
Tigers have striped skin, not just striped fur.
The Pacific Ocean is wider than the Moon's diameter many times over.
A bolt of lightning contains enough energy to toast around one hundred thousand slices of bread.
Penguins propose to their mates with a pebble.
The smell of freshly cut grass is a plant distress call.
Sea otters hold hands while sleeping so they do not drift apart.
The world's oldest known living tree is over four thousand eight hundred years old.
Honeybees can recognize human faces.
The total weight of all ants on Earth once rivaled the total weight of all humans.
A rhinoceros's horn is made of keratin, the same material as human hair and nails.
Lobsters taste with their legs.
The Sahara Desert was once a green, lake-filled landscape.
A shrimp's heart is in its head.
There is enough gold in Earth's core to coat the planet's surface in a layer half a meter deep.
The longest place name in the world has eighty-five letters and is in New Zealand.
Elephants are the only animals that cannot jump.
Your stomach gets a new lining every few days so it does not digest itself.
The Eiffel Tower was meant to be a temporary installation.
A day on Mars is about forty minutes longer than a day on Earth.
The hashtag symbol is technically called an octothorpe.
Owls do not have eyeballs; they have eye tubes.
Bananas are slightly radioactive because they contain potassium.
The longest hiccupping spell lasted sixty-eight years.
A bird called the bar-tailed godwit can fly more than seven thousand miles without stopping.
The average cumulus cloud weighs about the same as eighty elephants.
Humans share about sixty percent of their DNA with bananas.
Crocodiles cannot stick out their tongues.
A group of pugs is called a grumble.
The metal gallium melts in your hand because its melting point is just below body temperature.
The longest English word without a vowel is rhythms.
A sneeze can travel out of your body at around one hundred miles per hour.
The Earth is not a perfect sphere; it bulges at the equator.
Pineapples take about two years to grow.
A group of jellyfish is called a smack.
The colour orange was named after the fruit, not the other way around.
Mantis shrimp can see a wider range of colours than humans can.
There are more trees on Earth than stars in the Milky Way.
A bolt of lightning is only about as wide as a thumb.
The longest recorded life of a goldfish was over forty years.
Astronauts grow taller in space because there is less gravity compressing their spines.
The hottest chili peppers can register over two million Scoville units.
Cats cannot taste sweetness.
The Earth's inner core is roughly as hot as the surface of the Sun.
A blue whale's tongue can weigh as much as an elephant.
Sound cannot travel through the vacuum of space.
A group of owls is called a parliament.
The Wright brothers' first flight was shorter than the wingspan of a Boeing 747.
Some species of bamboo can grow nearly three feet in a single day.
The deepest part of the ocean is deeper than Mount Everest is tall.
Frogs can freeze solid in winter and thaw back to life in spring.
The word robot comes from a Czech word meaning forced labour.
A snail's slime lets it crawl across the edge of a razor blade unharmed.
There is a planet made largely of diamond, called 55 Cancri e.
Camels have three eyelids to protect their eyes from sand.
The first computer programmer was a woman, Ada Lovelace, in the 1840s.
A teaspoon of soil contains more microorganisms than there are people on Earth.
The shortest complete sentence in English is I am.
Hummingbirds are the only birds that can fly backwards.
The average person walks the equivalent of five times around the world in a lifetime.
A lightning strike can fuse sand into glass tubes called fulgurites.
Starfish do not have brains or blood.
Mount Everest grows about a quarter of an inch taller every year.
A group of porcupines is called a prickle.
The Mona Lisa has no eyebrows.
A day on the dwarf planet Pluto lasts about six and a half Earth days.
Sharks can sense a single drop of blood in an Olympic-sized swimming pool.
The human body contains enough carbon to fill about nine thousand pencils.
Kangaroos cannot walk backwards.
The largest living organism on Earth is a fungus in Oregon covering thousands of acres.
A bolt of silk can be unwound from a single cocoon for nearly a mile.
The coldest temperature ever recorded on Earth was below minus one hundred twenty-eight degrees Fahrenheit in Antarctica.
Bees communicate the location of food by dancing.
Venus is the hottest planet in the solar system, even though Mercury is closer to the Sun.
The average human heart beats about one hundred thousand times a day.
A chameleon's tongue can be longer than its body.
The first webcam was created to monitor a coffee pot at Cambridge University.
Some jellyfish are effectively immortal and can revert to an earlier stage of life.
The total length of blood vessels in a human body is about sixty thousand miles.
Rats laugh when they are tickled.
The Sun makes up about ninety-nine point eight percent of the mass of the solar system.
Giraffes only need about thirty minutes of sleep a day.
A pineapple is a cluster of dozens of individual berries fused together.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa leans because it was built on soft ground.
Sea cucumbers can eject their internal organs to deter predators and regrow them later.
The human eye can distinguish about ten million different colours.
Wood frogs can survive having two thirds of their body freeze.
Lake Baikal in Russia holds about one fifth of the world's unfrozen fresh water.
A snail has thousands of microscopic teeth on its tongue.
The dot of confetti punched from paper is called a chad.
Dolphins have names for each other in the form of signature whistles.
The Eiffel Tower has its own secret apartment built by Gustave Eiffel.
A group of rhinoceroses is called a crash.
Light from the Sun takes about eight minutes to reach Earth.
The fear of long words is humorously named hippopotomonstrosesquippedaliophobia.
Octopuses can change both the colour and texture of their skin in an instant.
The total number of possible iterations of a Rubik's Cube is over forty-three quintillion.
A newborn kangaroo is about the size of a jellybean.
Cashews grow on the bottom of a fruit called a cashew apple.
The human brain uses about twenty percent of the body's total energy.
The Atlantic Ocean is widening by about an inch each year.
A group of ferrets is called a business.
Bats are the only mammals capable of true sustained flight.
The world's smallest reptile, a chameleon, can sit on the tip of a human finger.
Sloths can rotate their heads almost three hundred degrees.
Coffee was first discovered when a goat herder noticed his goats becoming energetic after eating certain berries.
A galaxy called Andromeda is on a collision course with the Milky Way, billions of years from now.
The average lifespan of a taste bud is about ten days.
The platypus is one of the few mammals that lays eggs.
A single bolt of lightning is hot enough to vaporize the moisture inside a tree and make it explode.
Earthworms have five hearts.
The smell of rain has a name: petrichor.
Roughly seventy percent of the oxygen we breathe is produced by the ocean.
The largest snowflakes can fall slower than the smallest because of their shape.
A baby octopus is about the size of a flea when it hatches.
The Voyager 1 spacecraft is the most distant human-made object from Earth.
Cats spend about seventy percent of their lives sleeping.
The average person produces enough saliva in a lifetime to fill two swimming pools.
A group of hedgehogs is called an array.
The tallest waterfall, Angel Falls in Venezuela, is so high the water often turns to mist before reaching the ground.
Penguins can leap up to nine feet out of the water.
The word alphabet comes from the first two Greek letters, alpha and beta.
A scallop can have up to two hundred eyes around the edge of its shell.
Bamboo is technically a grass, not a tree.
The Moon is slowly drifting away from Earth at about an inch and a half per year.
A flamingo can only eat with its head upside down.
There are more public libraries in the United States than there are McDonald's restaurants.
The skin is the largest organ of the human body.
Sea horses are the only species in which the male becomes pregnant.
The Grand Canyon can hold around nine hundred trillion footballs.
A group of giraffes is called a tower.
Honey is the only food that includes all the substances necessary to sustain life, including water.
The average cloud floats because the water droplets in it are tiny and spread out.
The fastest land animal, the cheetah, can accelerate faster than most sports cars.
Some metals are so reactive they catch fire in water.
The human body has enough iron in it to make a small nail.
A day on Jupiter lasts only about ten hours.
Squids can have eyes as large as dinner plates.
The longest mountain range on Earth is mostly underwater.
A group of frogs is called an army.
Apple seeds contain a compound that releases cyanide when digested, but in tiny harmless amounts.
The Sun is about four and a half billion years old.
A snowflake usually has six sides because of the way water molecules bond.
The average human will spend about twenty-six years of their life asleep.
Glass is sometimes considered a slow-moving liquid, though it behaves like a solid.
A group of zebras is called a dazzle.
The deepest cave on Earth descends more than a mile and a half underground.
Otters have a favourite rock they keep in a pouch of skin to crack open shellfish.
The pupil of an eye is actually a hole that lets light into the retina.
The Eiffel Tower is repainted roughly every seven years using tons of paint.
A blue whale is louder than a jet engine.
Spiders use their silk to fly through the air, a behaviour called ballooning.
The human body sheds about a million skin cells every day.
A bolt of lightning can strike the same place many times; the Empire State Building is hit dozens of times a year.
Reindeer eyes change colour from gold in summer to blue in winter.
The world's largest living structure, the Great Barrier Reef, can be seen from space.
A group of kangaroos is called a mob.
Bananas float in water, as do apples and watermelons.
The pistol shrimp can snap its claw fast enough to create a bubble hotter than the surface of the Sun for an instant.
The first email was sent in 1971.
A hippopotamus can hold its breath underwater for about five minutes.
The Earth travels around the Sun at about sixty-seven thousand miles per hour.
Sea turtles return to the same beach where they hatched to lay their own eggs.
A group of lemurs is called a conspiracy.
The longest river in the world, by most measures, is the Nile.
Some species of ant can lift objects fifty times their own body weight.
The space between your eyebrows is called the glabella.
A jellyfish is about ninety-five percent water.
The average person blinks around fifteen to twenty times a minute.
The largest volcano in the solar system, Olympus Mons, is on Mars and is about three times the height of Everest.
A group of butterflies is called a kaleidoscope.
Penguins have a gland that filters salt out of the seawater they drink.
The first photograph ever taken required about eight hours of exposure.
Polar bears can smell a seal from nearly a mile away.
The total surface area of a pair of human lungs is about the size of a tennis court.
A group of toads is called a knot.
Mercury and Venus are the only two planets in our solar system without moons.
The harder you concentrate on falling asleep, the harder it usually becomes.
A baby spider is called a spiderling.
The Dead Sea is so salty that people float on its surface effortlessly.
The wood frog's heart can stop beating entirely while it is frozen and restart in spring.
A group of otters resting together on water is called a raft.
The human skeleton renews itself completely about every ten years.
Lightning strikes Earth about eight million times a day.
The peregrine falcon is the fastest animal alive, diving at over two hundred miles per hour.
A teaspoon of honey represents the life work of about a dozen bees.
The Sun loses about four million tons of mass every second by converting it to energy.
A group of cats is called a clowder.
The deepest known point in the ocean is the Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench.
Cucumbers are about ninety-six percent water.
The average human heart will pump enough blood in a lifetime to fill a supertanker.
Some bamboo species flower only once every one hundred and twenty years.
A group of eagles is called a convocation.
The aurora borealis is caused by charged particles from the Sun hitting Earth's atmosphere.
A koala sleeps up to twenty-two hours a day.
The smallest bone in the human body, the stapes in the ear, is about the size of a grain of rice.
Watermelons are both a fruit and a vegetable, related to cucumbers and squash.
A group of squid is called a squad.
The Burj Khalifa is so tall that people on the top floors can watch the sunset twice in one evening.
Sharks have existed for more than four hundred million years.
The average raindrop falls at about seven to eighteen miles per hour.
A snail can regrow its eyes if they are lost.
The human body glows faintly with light too dim for the eye to see.
A group of hippos is called a bloat.
The largest pumpkin ever grown weighed over twenty-seven hundred pounds.
Bees have five eyes.
The Pacific is the largest and deepest of Earth's oceans.
A single mushroom can release billions of spores.
Hummingbirds are the only birds that can hover in still air for long periods.
The blue whale is the largest animal known to have ever lived, larger than any dinosaur.
A group of ravens is called an unkindness.
The Earth's magnetic poles have flipped many times over its history.
The fastest gust of wind ever recorded reached over two hundred fifty miles per hour.
Octopuses have been observed using coconut shells as portable shelters.
The average adult human is made up of about thirty-seven trillion cells.
A group of bats is called a cauldron.
Saturn's rings are made mostly of ice and rock and are incredibly thin relative to their width.
The world's quietest room absorbs so much sound that people can hear their own heartbeat.
A starfish can regrow a lost arm, and some can grow a whole new body from one arm.
The dot you see in the center of an old television after switching it off is the last of the picture fading.
A group of finches is called a charm.
The human tongue is covered in thousands of taste buds, each lasting only about ten days.
Some clouds can hold the water weight of several jumbo jets.
The Eiffel Tower sways slightly in strong wind, by up to a few inches.
A leech has thirty-two brains arranged in segments.
The shortest war in recorded history was between Britain and Zanzibar in 1896.
The Great Fire of London in 1666 destroyed most of the medieval city but killed very few people.
Oxford University is older than the Aztec Empire.
The Roman numeral system has no symbol for zero.
Napoleon was once attacked by a horde of rabbits released for a hunt.
The first ancient Olympic Games had only one event, a short footrace.
Ancient Egyptians shaved their eyebrows to mourn the death of a family cat.
The guillotine remained a legal method of execution in France until 1977.
The Hundred Years War actually lasted one hundred and sixteen years.
Tutankhamun was buried with a dagger made from meteorite iron.
The Berlin Wall stood for twenty-eight years before it fell in 1989.
Albert Einstein was offered the presidency of Israel but declined.
George Washington grew hemp on his farm.
The first message sent over the early internet was meant to be login but the system crashed after two letters.
The Eiffel Tower was nearly torn down in 1909 before it became a radio antenna.
Ancient Roman concrete has lasted two thousand years and can heal its own cracks.
The Mongol Empire was the largest contiguous land empire in history.
The first known author whose name survives was a Mesopotamian priestess named Enheduanna.
Vending machines date back to ancient Greece, where they dispensed holy water for a coin.
The Pony Express only operated for about eighteen months.
Cleopatra was of Greek Macedonian descent.
The first vaccine was developed against smallpox in the late 1700s.
The Great Pyramid was the tallest human-made structure for nearly four thousand years.
The original Olympic athletes competed without clothing.
Medieval alchemists believed a philosopher's stone could turn lead into gold.
The earliest known board game, Senet, was played in ancient Egypt.
The bubonic plague reduced Europe's population by an estimated one third in the 1300s.
The Rosetta Stone was the key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs.
The first traffic signal was installed to manage horse-drawn carriages before cars were common.
Pompeii was buried and preserved by ash from Mount Vesuvius in the year 79.
The first modern Olympic Games were held in Athens in 1896.
The world's oldest known written recipe is for beer.
The earliest known trousers are about three thousand years old, found in western China.
Paper money was first used in China over a thousand years ago.
Saint Patrick, the patron saint of Ireland, was born in Roman Britain.
The first crossword puzzle was published in 1913.
The Titanic's distress rockets were white, which caused nearby ships to misread them.
The first widely cited spam email was sent in 1978.
The oldest known musical instrument is a flute carved from bird bone over forty thousand years ago.
The word salary comes from the Latin for salt, which Roman soldiers were sometimes paid in.
The oldest known wheel used for transport is over five thousand years old.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa took almost two hundred years to build.
Honeybees were introduced to the Americas by European settlers.
Tomatoes were once feared in Europe as poisonous.
The world's oldest still-operating hotel in Japan has run for over thirteen hundred years.
Vikings reached North America about five hundred years before Columbus.
The dollar sign likely evolved from the abbreviation for the Spanish peso.
One of the world's first novels, The Tale of Genji, was written in Japan around the year 1000.
Coffee houses in 1600s England were nicknamed penny universities.
The first underground passenger railway opened in London in 1863.
Russia spans eleven time zones.
The lowest exposed land on Earth is the shore of the Dead Sea.
Canada has more lakes than the rest of the world combined.
The Atacama Desert in Chile is the driest non-polar place on Earth.
Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador is the point on Earth's surface farthest from its center.
The Mariana Trench is deep enough to swallow Mount Everest with more than a mile to spare.
Iceland grows a few centimeters each year as tectonic plates pull apart.
There are towns in Norway where the sun does not set for weeks in summer.
The Caspian Sea is the largest enclosed body of water on Earth.
Greenland is the world's largest island that is not a continent.
The Nile flows from south to north.
Australia is wider than the diameter of the Moon.
Lake Baikal is the deepest freshwater lake in the world.
Vatican City is the smallest sovereign country in the world.
Point Nemo in the Pacific is the spot in the ocean farthest from any land.
Mount Thor in Canada has the longest purely vertical drop on Earth.
The Danakil Depression in Ethiopia is one of the hottest inhabited places on Earth.
Bhutan measures national progress partly through Gross National Happiness.
Some glaciers look blue because dense ice absorbs every colour of light except blue.
Mongolia is the most sparsely populated sovereign country on Earth.
The Tibetan Plateau is often called the roof of the world.
The Mississippi River briefly flowed backward during an earthquake in 1812.
Istanbul is a major city that sits on two continents at once.
The English word set has one of the largest numbers of distinct dictionary meanings.
The most common letter in English is e.
No common English word rhymes perfectly with orange, silver, or month.
A pangram is a sentence that uses every letter of the alphabet at least once.
The word goodbye is a shortening of the phrase God be with ye.
Many languages historically used a single word for both blue and green.
The longest word in major dictionaries names a lung disease and has forty-five letters.
Esperanto is a constructed language created to ease communication between nations.
The word nerd first appeared in a Dr. Seuss book.
Sign languages are full natural languages with their own grammar and regional dialects.
There are languages whose speakers describe space only with compass directions, never left or right.
A word that reads the same forward and backward is a palindrome.
The ampersand was once recited as the final letter of the alphabet.
The word muscle comes from a Latin word meaning little mouse.
Some words, called contronyms, are their own opposites, such as cleave and sanction.
The word checkmate comes from a Persian phrase meaning the king is helpless.
Pineapples were once so rare in Europe that people rented them as party centerpieces.
Carrots were originally purple and white before orange varieties were cultivated.
Cacao beans were used as currency by the Aztecs.
Peanuts are legumes, more closely related to beans than to tree nuts.
Ripe cranberries bounce when they are fresh.
Apples are members of the rose family.
Saffron is among the most expensive spices because each flower yields only three threads.
White chocolate contains no cocoa solids, only cocoa butter.
Rhubarb leaves are toxic, although the stalks are a common dessert ingredient.
The holes in Swiss cheese are bubbles left by carbon-dioxide-producing bacteria.
Caesar salad was invented in Tijuana, Mexico.
Fortune cookies were popularized in the United States, not China.
A single vanilla orchid flower must be hand-pollinated on the one day it opens.
The red food colouring carmine is made from crushed cochineal insects.
Worcestershire sauce is fermented with anchovies.
Watermelons were first domesticated in Africa thousands of years ago.
The first computer mouse was carved from a block of wood.
The word bug for a glitch spread after a real moth was found jamming an early computer.
The very first webpage is still online today.
Wi-Fi is a brand name and does not stand for any specific phrase.
A modern smartphone has far more computing power than all of NASA had during the Apollo missions.
The first text message ever sent read Merry Christmas.
The at symbol was chosen for email addresses because it was otherwise rarely used.
The first item ever scanned with a barcode was a pack of chewing gum.
The first banner advertisement appeared on the web in 1994.
Bluetooth is named after a medieval Scandinavian king who united warring tribes.
The first widely used emoji set was created in Japan in the late 1990s.
The first video uploaded to YouTube was filmed at a zoo.
Floppy disks are the reason the save icon looks the way it does.
Email predates the World Wide Web by more than a decade.
The first iPhone was released in 2007.
The first digital camera, built in 1975, needed twenty-three seconds to record one image.
The QR code was invented to track car parts on an assembly line.
A rainbow is actually a full circle, but the ground usually hides its lower half.
No two snowflakes are believed to be exactly alike at the molecular level.
Raindrops are not tear-shaped; they are rounded, flattening as they fall.
Lightning can heat the air around it to roughly thirty thousand kelvin.
The fastest surface wind ever measured on Earth came from a tornado.
Snow is technically clear, but it scatters light so it appears white.
A single bolt of lightning carries enough energy to power a home for weeks if captured.
Some deserts have gone decades without measurable rainfall.
Hail can grow to the size of grapefruits in powerful storms.
Fog is simply a cloud that forms at ground level.
The eye of a hurricane is calm and often clear.
Thunder is the sound of air rapidly expanding after being heated by lightning.
A blizzard is defined by wind and visibility, not by how much snow falls.
The wettest place on Earth receives more than four hundred inches of rain a year.
Most of the rain that falls began as snow or ice high in the clouds.
Sunflowers turn to track the Sun when they are young, a behaviour called heliotropism.
The largest flower in the world, the corpse flower, smells like rotting meat.
Bamboo can grow fast enough that you could almost watch it rise on a warm day.
A single tree can drink hundreds of liters of water on a hot day.
Trees can communicate and share nutrients through underground fungal networks.
The oldest individual trees on Earth are bristlecone pines nearly five thousand years old.
Some seeds can remain viable for thousands of years before sprouting.
Venus flytraps count the number of times prey touches them before closing.
The leaves of the sensitive plant fold up within seconds of being touched.
A coconut is technically a seed, a fruit, and a nut all at once by different definitions.
Mushrooms are more closely related to animals than to plants.
The tallest tree on Earth is a coast redwood over three hundred and seventy feet tall.
Moss has no roots and absorbs water directly through its surface.
The dandelion's seeds can travel for miles on the wind.
A pineapple plant produces only one pineapple at a time.
The water lily can support significant weight on its broad floating leaves.
Some plants release chemicals to warn their neighbours of insect attacks.
Bananas grow pointing upward, not hanging down.
The smell of fresh-cut grass is a chemical signal released when the plant is wounded.
A grain of rice plant can produce thousands of grains from a single seed over a season.
Aspirin was originally derived from the bark of the willow tree.
Pine cones open and close depending on humidity.
The human body contains about the same percentage of water as a cucumber early in life.
You are about a centimeter taller in the morning than at night.
The human eye can perceive a single photon under ideal conditions.
Fingernails grow faster on your dominant hand.
The strongest muscle in the body for its size is the masseter, used for chewing.
Your brain generates enough electricity to power a small light bulb.
Humans are the only animals known to blush.
The surface area of the human lungs is roughly the size of a tennis court.
Babies are born with around three hundred bones, which fuse to two hundred and six in adulthood.
The acid in your stomach is strong enough to dissolve some metals.
A human can survive longer without food than without sleep in extreme cases.
The cornea is one of the few parts of the body with no blood supply.
Your heart beats about a hundred thousand times every day.
The smallest muscles in the body are in the middle ear.
Goosebumps are a leftover reflex from when human ancestors had more body hair.
The human body produces about twenty-five million new cells every second.
Taste is heavily influenced by smell, which is why food seems bland with a cold.
Your sense of smell can recall memories more strongly than any other sense.
The average person spends about six months of their life waiting at traffic lights.
Humans glow with a tiny amount of visible light too faint to see.
The fastest message your nervous system sends travels well over two hundred miles per hour.
Adults have fewer bones than newborns because many fuse during growth.
The little finger contributes a large share of the hand's overall grip strength.
Your body has more bacterial cells than human cells by count.
The middle of a long bone contains marrow that makes blood cells.
Yawning may help cool the brain.
The pinky toe helps with balance more than its size suggests.
A sneeze briefly shuts down many of the body's systems at once.
Mathematics has a number called googol, which is a one followed by a hundred zeros.
Zero was treated as a full number relatively late in mathematical history.
A circle has an infinite number of lines of symmetry.
The number pi has been calculated to trillions of digits but never ends or repeats.
There are exactly as many even numbers as whole numbers, even though it seems impossible.
A prime number has exactly two factors, itself and one.
The Fibonacci sequence appears in sunflowers, pinecones, and seashells.
A googolplex is so large it cannot be written out in the observable universe.
Any number plus its reverse, repeated, often leads to a palindrome.
The equals sign was invented to avoid repeating the words is equal to.
There are infinitely many prime numbers.
A number is divisible by three if the sum of its digits is divisible by three.
The word hundred originally meant a much larger quantity in old counting systems.
The shape with the most sides still has a name no matter how many sides it has.
Multiplying a number by nine and adding the digits of the result always returns to nine.
The golden ratio appears throughout art, architecture, and nature.
Negative numbers were once dismissed as absurd by many mathematicians.
A magic square has rows, columns, and diagonals that all add to the same total.
The probability that two people in a room of twenty-three share a birthday is over fifty percent.
There is no largest number, since you can always add one.
The ancient Greeks proved many geometric truths still taught today.
A line has length but no width in pure mathematics.
The number four is the only number with the same number of letters as its value in English.
Roman numerals have no straightforward way to write very large numbers compactly.
The plus sign likely comes from a shorthand for the Latin word for and.
A group of pandas is called an embarrassment.
Dolphins sleep with one half of their brain awake at a time.
A snail's mouth is no larger than the head of a pin yet holds thousands of teeth.
Elephants can recognize themselves in a mirror.
A woodpecker can peck about twenty times per second.
Cats have a special collarbone that lets them always land on their feet.
The mantis shrimp can throw a punch as fast as a bullet from a small gun.
A group of foxes is called a skulk.
Honeybees beat their wings more than two hundred times a second.
The axolotl can regrow entire limbs, parts of its heart, and even its brain.
A tarantula can survive for over two years without eating.
Crows can remember individual human faces for years.
An adult flamingo is pink because of pigments in the algae and shrimp it eats.
Cheetahs cannot roar, but they can purr.
The tongue of a blue whale can weigh as much as a small car.
A pig cannot look up into the sky without great difficulty.
Reindeer can see ultraviolet light.
A snail can produce a slime that is both glue and lubricant at once.
Hippos secrete a red oily substance that acts as natural sunscreen.
A group of jellyfish drifting together is called a bloom.
Male seahorses carry and give birth to their young.
The pistol shrimp stuns prey with a snapping claw, not its pincers.
A flea can accelerate faster than a space shuttle at launch.
Giant Pacific octopuses can have an arm span of over fourteen feet.
A group of larks is called an exaltation.
Dogs can smell some diseases on a person's breath.
The bombardier beetle sprays a boiling chemical mixture at attackers.
Sea otters have the densest fur of any animal, with up to a million hairs per square inch.
A group of geese on the ground is called a gaggle, but in flight it is a skein.
Ants do not have lungs; they breathe through tiny holes in their bodies.
A horse's teeth take up more space in its skull than its brain.
The immortal jellyfish can revert to its juvenile form to escape death.
Some frogs can be frozen and revived because they produce a natural antifreeze.
A group of rhinos charging together is called a crash.
Hummingbird nests are often no bigger than a walnut shell.
The aardvark's name means earth pig in Afrikaans.
A snake can sense heat through special pit organs to hunt in the dark.
Elephants greet each other with elaborate displays of trunk-touching.
The smallest mammal by mass is the bumblebee bat, lighter than a coin.
A group of hyenas is called a cackle.
Pigeons can be trained to recognize different human faces and even artworks.
The tongue of a chameleon can unroll faster than the human eye can follow.
A snail's shell grows with it throughout its life.
The mimic octopus can imitate the look and movement of other sea creatures.
Beethoven composed some of his greatest works after he had gone deaf.
The longest officially recorded piece of music is designed to play for over six hundred years.
A standard piano has eighty-eight keys.
The world's largest playable instrument is a cave organ in Virginia.
Mozart wrote his first symphony at the age of eight.
The theremin is played without being touched.
A violin contains around seventy separate pieces of wood.
The harmonica is the best-selling musical instrument in the world.
The longest concert by a single artist lasted more than a day.
Vinyl records store sound as physical grooves read by a needle.
The lowest note a standard piano can play vibrates around twenty-seven times a second.
A song stuck in your head is sometimes called an earworm.
The world's oldest known song is over three thousand years old.
A grand piano's strings are under tons of combined tension.
The didgeridoo is one of the oldest wind instruments still played today.
The first known music notation was written on clay tablets.
The most recorded song in history is widely considered to be a popular standard ballad.
Humans can recognize a familiar song from less than a second of audio.
The drum is one of the oldest musical instruments known to humanity.
The Mona Lisa is painted on a wood panel, not canvas.
Vincent van Gogh sold very few paintings during his lifetime.
The color blue was one of the last colors to appear in human language.
The most expensive painting ever sold went for hundreds of millions of dollars.
Ancient Roman statues were originally painted in bright colors.
The world's largest painting on canvas covers thousands of square feet.
Michelangelo painted the Sistine Chapel ceiling while standing, not lying down.
Some Renaissance painters ground real gemstones to make their pigments.
The color of the human-made pigment mummy brown was once made from actual mummies.
A single tube of certain historical blue paint once cost more than gold.
The oldest known cave paintings are more than forty thousand years old.
Picasso could draw before he could walk, according to his mother.
The smiley face symbol was designed in the 1960s.
The first photograph took about eight hours of exposure to capture.
Olympic gold medals are mostly made of silver.
A marathon is just over twenty-six miles because of a route adjustment at a single Olympic Games.
A baseball has exactly one hundred and eight stitches.
Golf was once banned in Scotland because it distracted soldiers from archery.
The fastest recorded tennis serve traveled over one hundred and sixty miles per hour.
Basketball was invented using a peach basket as the first hoop.
A regulation soccer ball has thirty-two panels in its classic design.
The Olympic flame is lit using the Sun's rays in Greece before each Games.
Boxing rings are square despite their name.
The first modern Olympics featured fewer than three hundred athletes.
A cricket match can last up to five days and still end in a draw.
The longest tennis match lasted over eleven hours across three days.
Table tennis was once banned in the Soviet Union for being harmful to the eyes.
Formula One cars can drive upside down in a tunnel at high speed because of downforce.
The Stanley Cup has a long list of names engraved on it.
Surfers can ride waves taller than a multi-story building.
A bowling pin only needs to tilt about seven degrees to fall.
The high jump technique called the Fosbury Flop changed the sport forever.
Chess is considered a sport in many countries.
A dollar bill can be folded thousands of times before it tears.
The world's largest gold bar weighs hundreds of kilograms.
The first ATM was installed in London in 1967.
Most of the world's money exists only as digital records, not physical cash.
The penny costs more than one cent to produce in some years.
Paper money is not made from paper but from a cotton and linen blend.
The largest banknote ever printed was worth a staggering, almost unspendable amount during hyperinflation.
The word bank comes from the Italian word for bench, where money changers sat.
A pile of one trillion dollar bills would stretch far beyond the Moon.
The first credit card was introduced in the 1950s.
Some countries have used giant stone discs as currency.
The Federal Reserve shreds tons of worn-out currency every year.
The grooves on the edge of coins were originally added to stop people shaving off metal.
Salt was so valuable in some eras that it was traded ounce for ounce with gold.
The brain has no pain receptors of its own.
Your brain is more active during sleep than during many waking tasks.
The human brain can hold an estimated petabyte of information.
You cannot tickle yourself because your brain predicts the sensation.
The brain finishes developing well into a person's mid-twenties.
Memories are reconstructed each time you recall them, not replayed.
The smell of a place can trigger memories faster than a photo of it.
Your brain uses about as much power as a dim light bulb.
Laughter activates multiple regions of the brain at once.
The brain processes images it has seen for only a fraction of a second.
Counting sheep is actually a poor method for falling asleep, studies suggest.
Dreams can feel long but often last only minutes.
The average person has several dreams each night but forgets most of them.
A phenomenon called déjà vu may be a brief glitch in memory processing.
The brain cannot truly multitask; it switches rapidly between tasks.
People can recognize a familiar face in a fraction of a second.
The placebo effect can produce real physical changes in the body.
Your brain generates new connections every time you learn something.
Yawning appears to be contagious even between humans and dogs.
The fear of the number thirteen is called triskaidekaphobia.
The oldest known dice are over five thousand years old.
The board game Monopoly was used to help prisoners of war escape in real maps hidden inside.
A standard deck of cards can be arranged in more ways than there are atoms on Earth.
The Rubik's Cube took its inventor a month to solve the first time.
The first video game was a simple tennis simulation.
Chess originated in India over fifteen hundred years ago.
The yo-yo is one of the oldest toys, dating back thousands of years.
Crossword puzzles were once considered a dangerous waste of time by critics.
A jigsaw puzzle was originally a teaching tool for geography.
The first teddy bear was named after a U.S. president.
Playing cards were once used as money in parts of colonial Canada.
The longest game of Monopoly on record lasted over seventy days.
Dominoes can be set up to fall in patterns spanning entire rooms.
The game of checkers has been completely solved by computers.
The world's largest crossword has tens of thousands of clues.
Diamonds are not actually that rare; their price reflects careful market control.
Glass is made mostly from sand melted at very high temperatures.
Rubber was once erased pencil marks by rolling, which is how it got its name.
Stainless steel resists rust because of a thin invisible layer of chromium oxide.
Aluminum was once more precious than gold before an easy way to refine it was found.
A diamond and a pencil's graphite are both made of pure carbon.
Helium is the only element that was discovered in space before it was found on Earth.
The element with the highest melting point is tungsten.
Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at room temperature.
Gold is so soft that a single ounce can be hammered into a sheet covering many square feet.
Neon signs glow because electricity excites the gas inside them.
Water is one of the few substances that expands when it freezes.
Oxygen makes up about one fifth of the air we breathe.
The human body contains traces of nearly every naturally occurring element.
Salt is made of two elements that are each dangerous alone, sodium and chlorine.
Carbon forms more compounds than all other elements combined.
Most of the helium used on Earth comes from underground natural gas deposits.
Titanium is as strong as steel but much lighter.
The smell after rain comes partly from bacteria in the soil.
Lightning produces ozone, which gives the air a sharp clean scent.
Most of the visible universe is made of hydrogen and helium.
The Sun converts millions of tons of matter into energy every second.
A spoonful of a black hole's material would be unimaginably heavy.
Light from distant stars can take millions of years to reach us.
The footprints left on the Moon could last millions of years without wind to erase them.
Space is completely silent because there is no air to carry sound.
A year on Mercury lasts only about eighty-eight Earth days.
There are likely more planets than stars in our galaxy.
The largest known star could swallow billions of Suns by volume.
Neutron stars can spin hundreds of times per second.
The observable universe is about ninety-three billion light-years across.
Jupiter's Great Red Spot is a storm larger than Earth that has raged for centuries.
A comet's tail always points away from the Sun.
The International Space Station orbits Earth roughly every ninety minutes.
There is a giant cloud of alcohol floating in space near the center of our galaxy.
The Sun is so large that about one million Earths could fit inside it.
A teaspoon of the Sun's core would be hot beyond anything on Earth.
Galaxies are not scattered randomly but arranged in vast cosmic webs.
The coldest known place in the universe is a nebula colder than deep space itself.
Some stars are so old they formed not long after the universe began.
The light you see from the Sun left it about eight minutes ago.
Saturn is not the only planet with rings; Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune have them too.
A single solar flare can release more energy than millions of atomic bombs.
The Hubble telescope has captured light from galaxies billions of years old.
The first artificial satellite, Sputnik, was about the size of a beach ball.
Astronauts' height can increase by a couple of inches in microgravity.
The Moon is moving away from Earth slowly enough that ancient days were shorter.
A day on Earth is gradually getting longer over millions of years.
There may be more than a hundred billion galaxies in the observable universe.
The Eiffel Tower uses an interlaced iron design to handle wind.
The Empire State Building has its own ZIP code.
The Sydney Opera House roof is covered in over a million tiles.
The Burj Khalifa is more than half a mile tall.
The Colosseum could be flooded to stage mock naval battles.
Some ancient Roman roads are still in use today.
The Hoover Dam's concrete is still slowly curing decades after it was poured.
The Golden Gate Bridge is painted a color officially called international orange.
The Great Wall of China is not a single wall but many sections built over centuries.
The Leaning Tower of Pisa has eight stories and nearly three hundred steps.
The Petronas Towers were once the tallest buildings in the world.
Skyscrapers sway slightly in the wind by design to avoid breaking.
The Channel Tunnel runs deep beneath the seabed between England and France.
Venice is built on millions of wooden piles driven into the mud.
The Pantheon in Rome still has the world's largest unreinforced concrete dome.
Some medieval cathedrals took hundreds of years to complete.
The first skyscraper, built in Chicago, was only ten stories tall.
The Brooklyn Bridge was the longest suspension bridge in the world when it opened.
A building in Japan was designed to fold up in sections during earthquakes.
The CN Tower in Toronto held the title of tallest free-standing structure for decades.
The deepest mine on Earth descends several miles below the surface.
The first ferris wheel was built to rival the Eiffel Tower.
A single brick from the Great Wall could weigh dozens of pounds.
The world's longest sea bridge stretches for dozens of miles.
The first traffic tunnel under a river opened in the 1800s.
The tallest statue in the world is taller than the Statue of Liberty several times over.
Some lighthouses were powered by whale oil before electricity.
The fastest passenger trains can exceed two hundred miles per hour.
The first powered flight covered a distance shorter than a modern airliner's wingspan.
A jumbo jet has millions of individual parts.
The black box flight recorder is actually bright orange.
Hot air balloons were the first human flight technology, predating airplanes.
The fastest manned aircraft has flown more than six times the speed of sound.
A commercial airplane's tires are inflated to several times car tire pressure.
The world's largest passenger plane can carry more than eight hundred people.
Submarines can stay underwater for months at a time.
The first cars had no steering wheels; they used levers.
The longest straight railway track in the world runs for almost three hundred miles.
A Formula One pit stop can change all four tires in about two seconds.
The first speeding ticket was issued in the 1890s.
Cruise ships can be longer than the height of many skyscrapers laid down.
The bicycle was invented before the modern rubber tire.
Some electric cars can accelerate faster than many sports cars.
The world's busiest airport handles tens of millions of passengers a year.
The first roller coaster was built on a former mining track.
A space shuttle reached orbit in under nine minutes after launch.
Trains were once thought too fast for the human body to survive.
The longest cycle race in the world covers thousands of miles over weeks.
A modern container ship can carry tens of thousands of containers.
The first underwater tunnel was dug by hand over many years.
The fastest production motorcycle can exceed three hundred kilometers per hour.
A group of butterflies feeding together is sometimes called a roost.
The wings of a butterfly are actually transparent, covered by tiny coloured scales.
A single honeybee produces about a twelfth of a teaspoon of honey in its lifetime.
Dragonflies have nearly three-hundred-sixty-degree vision.
A snail can have over ten thousand teeth arranged on its tongue.
The heart of a shrimp is located in its head.
Ladybugs can release a foul-smelling fluid from their joints to deter predators.
A cockroach can live for weeks without its head.
Ants stretch when they wake up, much like humans do.
A queen bee can lay up to two thousand eggs in a single day.
Termites build mounds with natural ventilation systems that regulate temperature.
A grasshopper can leap many times its body length in a single jump.
Some moths drink the tears of sleeping animals.
The praying mantis is the only insect that can turn its head a full one hundred eighty degrees.
Fireflies produce light through a chemical reaction that gives off almost no heat.
A spider's web silk is produced as a liquid and hardens into thread as it is pulled.
Beetles make up roughly a quarter of all known animal species.
A single colony of ants can contain millions of individuals.
Caterpillars completely dissolve inside the chrysalis before becoming butterflies.
Bees can fly higher than Mount Everest in laboratory tests.
A snail breathes through a single lung-like organ.
Earthworms can eat their weight in soil every day.
A housefly hums in the key of F in many recordings.
Some species of cicada stay underground for seventeen years before emerging.
The bald eagle is not actually bald; its name comes from an old word for white.
An owl can rotate its head about two hundred seventy degrees.
Penguins cannot fly, but they are excellent swimmers.
A flamingo standing on one leg is actually conserving body heat.
Some birds sleep while flying, resting half their brain at a time.
The ostrich is the fastest two-legged land animal.
A parrot can learn to use words in context, not just mimic them.
The wandering albatross has the largest wingspan of any living bird.
Hummingbirds are the only birds that can fly straight up and down.
A pigeon can find its way home from hundreds of miles away.
The kiwi bird lays an egg that is huge relative to its body size.
Crows have been observed using tools and even bending wire into hooks.
A swan can have over twenty thousand feathers.
Penguins propose with a carefully chosen pebble.
The peacock's tail can be longer than the rest of its body.
Some woodpeckers store thousands of acorns in holes they drill in trees.
A duck's quack does echo, despite a popular myth that it does not.
The arctic tern migrates from pole to pole, the longest migration of any animal.
A chicken can remember over a hundred different faces.
Flamingo chicks are born grey and turn pink as they grow.
The hoatzin chick has claws on its wings to climb branches.
A blue whale can eat several tons of krill in a single day.
The narwhal's tusk is actually an enlarged tooth.
A jellyfish has no brain, heart, or bones.
Sea stars can turn their stomachs inside out to digest food.
The blue-ringed octopus carries enough venom to threaten many humans.
A clownfish can change sex during its lifetime.
Seahorses mate for life in many species and travel holding tails.
The anglerfish lures prey with a glowing growth on its head.
Coral reefs support about a quarter of all marine life.
A pufferfish inflates by gulping water to deter predators.
The electric eel can generate a strong shock to stun prey.
A starfish can have far more than five arms in some species.
Whale songs can travel for hundreds of miles underwater.
Some deep-sea fish produce their own light through bioluminescence.
A sea cucumber breathes through its rear end.
The giant squid has the largest eyes of any animal.
Manatees are distant relatives of elephants.
A barnacle attaches itself headfirst and feeds with its feet.
The leafy sea dragon is a fish that looks like floating seaweed.
A shark must keep moving to keep water flowing over its gills, in many species.
The mantis shrimp sees colours humans cannot even imagine.
The world's largest pearl weighs many pounds and is irregularly shaped.
Rubber bands last longer when kept in a cool place.
Ketchup was once sold as a medicine in the 1830s.
A standard pencil can draw a line dozens of miles long.
The eraser was invented decades after the pencil.
The plastic tips on shoelaces are called aglets.
A rubber duck released into the ocean has been tracked across the world by researchers.
Velcro was inspired by burrs sticking to a dog's fur.
The microwave oven was discovered by accident when a chocolate bar melted near radar equipment.
Super glue was originally rejected as too sticky for its intended use.
The first vending machine in modern times sold postcards.
The zipper was originally called the clasp locker.
A common drinking straw was patented in the 1880s to replace soggy reeds.
Bubble wrap began as a failed attempt to make textured wallpaper.
The Slinky was invented when an engineer knocked a spring off a shelf.
Play-Doh was first sold as a wallpaper cleaner.
The first toothbrush with bristles was invented in China.
Matches were invented after the lighter, not before.
Post-it Notes came from a glue that was considered a failure.
The safety pin was invented and patented in a single afternoon.
A paperclip can be unfolded into a wire about ten centimeters long.
The first roller skates were demonstrated by their inventor crashing into a mirror.
Chewing gum has been found that is thousands of years old.
The teabag was invented by accident when samples were sent in small silk pouches.
Corn flakes were invented as a health food.
The first umbrella designs date back thousands of years.
Sticky notes are sold in enough quantity each year to circle the Earth many times.
The dishwasher was invented by a woman frustrated with servants chipping her china.
A wine cork can be compressed and will spring back to its original shape.
The bar code was first sketched in sand on a beach.
Your hair can reveal what you have eaten and where you have been.
Humans are the only primates without pigment in the palms of their hands.
The average person laughs many more times per day as a child than as an adult.
Tooth enamel is the hardest substance the human body produces.
You blink less when staring at screens, which can dry out your eyes.
Fingernails grow about four times faster than toenails.
The human ear can detect sounds as faint as a whisper across a quiet room.
Your body produces about a liter and a half of saliva each day.
A person's height shrinks slightly throughout the day due to spinal compression.
The skin on your lips is much thinner than on the rest of your body.
Humans shed and regrow the outer layer of skin about every month.
Your liver can regenerate itself even after losing a large portion.
The human eye blinks about ten thousand times a day.
Earwax is a natural cleaner and protector for the ear canal.
The colour of your eyes is determined by tiny amounts of pigment.
A full head of human hair could support the weight of two elephants in theory.
The fastest muscles in the body are the ones that move the eyes.
Tears come in different chemical types depending on why you cry.
The human body is home to trillions of microorganisms.
Your sense of taste weakens at high altitude, which is why airplane food can seem bland.
Babies do not produce tears for the first few weeks of life.
The average person spends years of their life eating.
A human can distinguish between thousands of distinct facial expressions.
The Sahara Desert is roughly the size of the United States.
The Amazon rainforest produces a large share of the world's oxygen.
Mount Everest's summit was once on the ocean floor.
The Pacific Ocean contains more than half of the world's free water.
There are more than seven thousand islands in the Caribbean.
Lake Superior holds enough water to cover both North and South America.
The Grand Canyon is over a mile deep in places.
Niagara Falls moves slowly upstream as it erodes the rock beneath it.
The Sahara is expanding southward over time.
Norway's coastline, including fjords, stretches longer than the Earth's circumference.
The Mariana Trench could hide the world's tallest mountain entirely.
There is a waterfall in Antarctica that runs red from iron-rich water.
The Amazon River once flowed in the opposite direction, toward the Pacific.
Death Valley holds the record for the hottest air temperature ever reliably measured.
Some sand dunes can sing or boom as the sand slides.
The Great Rift Valley is slowly splitting Africa into two landmasses.
Mount Kilimanjaro has glaciers despite sitting near the equator.
Iceland runs almost entirely on renewable geothermal and hydro power.
The world's largest hot desert and the world's largest cold desert are on different continents.
There are lakes beneath the ice of Antarctica that have been sealed for millions of years.
The deepest lake holds nearly a fifth of the planet's unfrozen fresh water.
Some rivers flow only during certain seasons and vanish the rest of the year.
A rainbow at night, lit by the Moon, is called a moonbow.
The colour purple does not exist as a single wavelength of light; the brain creates it.
White light contains all the colours of the rainbow combined.
Red light has the longest wavelength humans can see.
A prism splits white light into its component colours.
Some animals can see ultraviolet light that is invisible to humans.
The sky is blue because air scatters blue light more than other colours.
Sunsets appear red because light travels through more atmosphere at a low angle.
Black is the absence of visible light, while white is all of it together.
The human eye is most sensitive to green light.
Bioluminescent waves glow blue when tiny organisms are disturbed.
A mirror reflects nearly all the light that hits it.
The colour of a flame can reveal the chemical burning in it.
Mixing all colours of paint gives a dark muddy brown, but mixing light gives white.
Some deep-sea creatures are red because red light cannot reach their depths, making them invisible.
The fastest thing in the universe is light in a vacuum.
A laser is light so focused it can travel vast distances without spreading much.
The Northern Lights can appear in green, red, purple, and blue.
Light can be bent by gravity, an effect predicted by Einstein.
Color blindness is far more common in men than in women.
Sound travels faster through water than through air.
A whip cracks because its tip breaks the sound barrier.
The loudest sound ever recorded came from a volcanic eruption heard thousands of miles away.
Sound cannot travel in the vacuum of space.
Whales communicate using some of the lowest-frequency sounds in nature.
A person's voice sounds different to them than to others because of bone conduction.
Echoes are simply sound waves bouncing back from a surface.
Bats navigate in the dark using echolocation.
The human ear can hear a remarkably wide range of frequencies.
Some elephants communicate using rumbles too low for humans to hear.
A sound wave is a vibration traveling through a medium.
The quietest place on Earth is a sound-absorbing chamber where people can hear their own organs.
Dogs can hear frequencies far beyond the human range.
Thunder can be heard from many miles away depending on conditions.
Ultrasound, too high for human ears, is used to see inside the body.
A tuning fork vibrates at a precise, steady frequency.
Wind instruments make sound by vibrating a column of air.
The speed of sound changes with temperature and altitude.
Crickets chirp faster in warmer weather, and you can estimate temperature by counting.
A single clap can produce a surprisingly complex pattern of echoes.
Time passes very slightly faster at the top of a mountain than at sea level.
A leap second is occasionally added to clocks to keep them aligned with Earth's rotation.
The concept of the seven-day week predates written history in some cultures.
There are about thirty-one million seconds in a year.
A single Earth day has not always been twenty-four hours long.
Atomic clocks are so precise they would lose less than a second over millions of years.
The international date line causes neighbouring islands to be a full day apart.
A nanosecond is one billionth of a second.
Some calendars have leap months instead of leap days.
The longest day of the year is the summer solstice.
Time zones were standardized largely to coordinate train schedules.
A light-year measures distance, not time.
The oldest known calendar is carved into stone thousands of years old.
A century has either twenty-four or twenty-five leap years depending on the rule.
The metric system defines the second using the vibrations of an atom.
A year on Neptune lasts about one hundred sixty-five Earth years.
Many cultures historically tracked time using the phases of the Moon.
The word month comes from the Moon's roughly monthly cycle.
There are exactly one thousand milliseconds in a second.
The earliest mechanical clocks had no minute hand.
Daylight saving time was popularized to make better use of summer evenings.
A blink lasts roughly a third of a second.
Glass marbles were once made by hand, one at a time.
The world's largest snow maze covers thousands of square feet.
A standard sheet of paper cannot be folded in half more than about seven or eight times by hand.
The longest recorded sneezing fit lasted more than two and a half years.
The tallest sandcastle ever built stood several stories high.
A single cloud-to-ground lightning bolt can branch into dozens of channels.
The world's largest cup of coffee held thousands of gallons.
The tallest documented person in history stood nearly nine feet tall.
The longest fingernails ever grown stretched many feet in total.
A group of people solving a Rubik's Cube blindfolded compete in real championships.
The world record for the most jumps on a pogo stick numbers in the hundreds of thousands.
The fastest recorded human sprint reached nearly twenty-eight miles per hour.
The longest wedding veil ever made stretched for miles.
The largest pizza ever made covered an area larger than a basketball court.
A single sequoia tree can weigh more than a fully loaded jumbo jet.
The smallest book ever printed is smaller than a grain of salt.
The longest hot dog ever made measured many meters in length.
A person once balanced a car on their head as a feat of strength.
The world's largest ball of twine weighs many tons.
The deepest a human has freedived on a single breath exceeds the height of many buildings.
The longest domino chain ever toppled involved millions of tiles.
A library book was once returned more than a century overdue.
The largest gathering of people dressed as the same character numbered in the thousands.
The fastest time to solve a Rubik's Cube is under four seconds.
The world's longest usable pencil stretched over the length of a swimming pool.
The most expensive spice in the world by weight is saffron.
A vanilla pod can take months to cure after harvest.
The world's hottest pepper can cause a real burning sensation that lasts for hours.
Cheese is the most stolen food product in the world.
The first ice cream cones were rolled by hand at a fair.
A single bee visits hundreds of flowers in one foraging trip.
Most of the spice we call cinnamon comes from tree bark.
Wasabi served in many restaurants is often dyed horseradish.
The flavour of bananas comes mostly from a single chemical compound.
Chocolate was once consumed only as a bitter drink, never as a solid bar.
A pineapple does not continue to ripen after it is picked.
Coffee is the second most traded commodity in the world after oil by some measures.
The world's largest omelette used tens of thousands of eggs.
A lemon contains more sugar than a strawberry by weight.
Popcorn pops because water trapped inside the kernel turns to steam.
The bubbles in carbonated drinks are carbon dioxide gas.
Olive trees can live and produce fruit for hundreds of years.
A pomegranate can contain hundreds of individual seeds.
Some of the oldest known beer recipes were written in ancient Mesopotamia.
The peanut is not a true nut but a member of the bean family.
Maple syrup takes dozens of liters of sap to make a single liter of syrup.
The word ketchup may come from a Chinese sauce called ke-tsiap.
The world's smallest country, Vatican City, has fewer than a thousand residents.
A bolt of lightning travels at roughly one third the speed of light on its return stroke.
The first alarm clock could only ring at one fixed time.
A group of kittens is called a kindle.
The human heart creates enough pressure to squirt blood several feet.
Octopus arms can act semi-independently, with neurons spread throughout them.
The Great Barrier Reef is the largest structure built by living organisms.
A single teaspoon of honey is the lifework of dozens of bees.
The first known use of soap dates back thousands of years to ancient Babylon.
A snowy owl's feathers cover even its feet for warmth.
Some species of fish can climb waterfalls using their mouths.
The world's largest flower can grow more than three feet across.
A typical lightning bolt is about as wide as your thumb but miles long.
Mount Everest is home to a layer of marine fossils near its peak.
The smallest ocean is the Arctic Ocean.
A camel can drink dozens of gallons of water in just a few minutes.
The blue whale's call can be louder than a jet at takeoff.
A spider's silk is, by weight, stronger than steel.
The Sun accounts for almost all the mass of the entire solar system.
A hummingbird must eat roughly its body weight in nectar every day.
The deepest point in the ocean is named after a ship, the Challenger.
A single oak tree can produce thousands of acorns in a good year.
The aurora can sometimes be heard as faint crackling sounds.
A koala's diet of eucalyptus leaves is toxic to most other animals.
The longest living animals on Earth include certain deep-sea clams over five hundred years old.
Frost flowers form on thin ice when conditions are just right.
The human body contains enough phosphorus to make the heads of thousands of matches.
A waterfall can create its own rainbow in the right light.
The fingerprints of identical twins are different from each other.
A single bolt of lightning can contain a billion volts.
The Eiffel Tower has thousands of metal parts held together by millions of rivets.
Some bamboo can grow so fast it audibly creaks as it rises.
